docs: timers and EOP (#5220)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/9-data-persistence.md

# Data persistence

One key feature of Motoko is its ability to automatically persist the program's state without explicit user instruction. This is called **orthogonal persistence**. Data persists across transactions and canister upgrades.

Motoko data persistence is not simple, but it prevents data corruption or loss while being efficient at the same time. No database, stable memory API, or stable data structure is required to retain state across upgrades. Instead, a simple `stable` keyword is sufficient to declare a data structure of arbitrary shape persistent, even if the structure uses sharing, has a deep complexity, or contains cycles transfers.

> In comparison to other supported languages for building canisters, such as Rust, data persistence must be achieved through explicit use of stable data structures and stable memory, as the language is not designed for orthogonal persistence and instead rearranges memory structures in an uncontrolled manner on re-compilation or at runtime.

Reviewer: as those languages are not designed...

Reviewer: ... and necessitate laborious serialisation and deserialisation of internal data

};
```

:::tip

You can emit the stable signature of an actor or actor class to a `.most` file using `moc` compiler option `--stable-types`. You should never need to author your own `.most` file.

:::

A stable signature `<stab-sig1>` is stable-compatible with another signature `<stab-sig2>` if, for every stable field `<id>: T` in `<stab-sig1>`, the following condition holds:

- `<stab-sig2>` has a stable field `<id>: U` such that `T` is a stable subtype of `U`.

#### Notes
- `<stab-sig2>` may include additional fields not present in `<stab-sig1>`.
- Matching fields may differ in mutability (`var` vs. `val`).

`<stab-sig1>` represents the signature of an older version, and `<stab-sig2>` represents a newer version.

> This compatibility ensures that the final value of a field from the old version can be safely used as the initial value of that field in the new version, without loss of data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The stable subtyping condition ensures that the final value of a field from the old version can be safely used as the initial value of that field in the new version, without loss of data.
```

### Implicit migration

Migration is automatically supported when the new program version is stable-compatible with the old version. The runtime system of Motoko then automatically handles the migration on upgrade.

More precisely, the following changes can be implicitly migrated:
* Adding actor fields.
* Changing the mutability of an actor field.
* Adding variant fields.
* Changing `Nat` to `Int`.

> * Any change that is allowed by Motoko stable subtyping rules. These are similar to Motoko subtyping, but stricter, and doesn't allow dropping of record fields or promotion to the type `Any`, either of which can result in data loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Any change that is allowed by Motoko stable subtyping rules. These are similar to Motoko subtyping, but stricter, and do not allow dropping of record fields or promotion to the type `Any`, either of which can result in data loss.
```
